Halley became the first civilian who was
appointed naval captain to pursue what many
regarded as an obsession with declination. Does
Dr Clark possess the credentials to make his
parallel voyage a success?

Paper 1 Reading

And does he share Halley’s obsessive trait? ‘| am
prepared to give up my life for eight months to
do this, so | suppose some people might think
I'm obsessed. But | wouldn't want to sail across
the Atlantic again without a good reason. Halley,
and his fascinating life, have given me a real
sense of purpose.

A ‘On our expedition we can use global
positioning satellites to determine that’ The
British Geological Survey and the United
States Navy have offered to supply instru-
ments. By chance, a Danish satellite will be
taking similar measurements over the globe.

B Ifall goes well, Halley’s accomplishments will
be celebrated once again. Dr Clark, himself
a keen sailor, plans to commemorate the
three-hundredth anniversary of Halley's trip
by retracing the route of the Paramore.

C As well as spending two years in Antarctica
and working in the geomagnetic group at
the British Geological Survey, he has already
sailed the 13,000 kilometres from Rio de
Janeiro to England. He envisages that the
expedition will be completed in four stages,
with four different crews.

D So it was that Halley, one of only two men
in the land at that time paid to conduct
scientific research, set sail for the Cape
Verde Islands with the grand plan of charting
declination in the North and South Atlantic.
The trip was quickly aborted because of
crew insubordination, but Halley returned
to the seas a second time.

E It will involve making the measurements that
Halley made, but with far more precise
instruments. These measurements need to
be updated because the terrestrial magnetic
field is slowly but constantly changing.

F In addition, the charts that he produced are
celebrated by cartographers — they are said
to be the first maps that used lines to
delineate physical quantities. The contours
became known briefly as ‘halleyan’ lines.

G ‘Halley led a remarkable life’ Dr Clark says.
‘He was not only a respected scientist but
also led expeditions. He was not just an
astronomer but also did research in
geophysics. While he was Astronomer
Royal, he mapped the positions of the stars,
and also found time for other interests.

39
