Test 2

Part 2

For questions 17-22, choose which of the paragraphs A-G on page 39 fit into the numbered gaps
in the following newspaper article. There is one extra paragraph which does not fit in any of the
gaps. Indicate your answers on the separate answer sheet.

In search of true north — and the man behind
Halley’s comet

Dr Toby Clark, a researcher at the British Geological Survey, aims to retrace
Sir Edmund Halley’s quest to chart compass variations. Anjana Ahuja reports.

Astronomer Sir Edmund Halley (1656-1742) is
best known for the comet that bears his name.
Yet one of his greatest accomplishments, in the
eyes of his contemporaries, was to chart, using
calculations made on his sea voyages on the
warship Paramore, the ‘variations of the
compass’. These variations are now known as
‘declination’, that is, the angle between magnetic
north and true geographical north. Without it,
sailors were unable to correct their compasses.
It was therefore impossible to deduce longitude

precisely and navigate the oceans.

I

470

This voyage took him and his crew to Rio de
Janeiro, down past South Georgia, up again to
Newfoundland and back to England. From these
travels Halley published, in 1701, a ‘New and
Correct Chart shewing the Variations of the
Compasse in the Western and Southern Oceans’.
More sophisticated successors to this primitive
cartographic effort proved indispensable to
seamen for more than a century, before a slow
change in the terrestrial magnetic field rendered
them inaccurate.

18 -

do

£70,000 will have to be raised before he
embarks, and Sir Vivian Fuchs, who led the first
cross-Antarctica expedition, is providing
support for his efforts to do this.

38

Dr Clark became fascinated by Halley during a
two-year posting to Halley Station in Antarctica,
where he read biographies of the great scientist.

19

It was during this period that Halley developed a
diving bell and also advised Sir Isaac Newton
during his writing of Principia Mathematica, the
foundation of classical physics. Recreating the
voyage, Dr Clark says, will afford Halley the
recognition he deserves. The projected
expedition, which he has entitled ‘In the Wake
of the Paramore’, will also have scientific merit.

20 |

The data collected should help to refine the
existing mathematical model of Earth’s magnetic
field, called the international geomagnetic
reference field. ‘It is common to measure the
size but not the direction of the magnetic field.
That's because you need to know true north to
measure the direction, says Dr Clark.

(21 |

|
Dr Clark hopes that his measurements will plug
any gaps in its coverage of the Atlantic Ocean
and, he points out, it is also useful to have
ground-based measurements as a comparison. It
is easy to forget just how significant Halley's
Atlantic journey really was. It was the first
dedicated scientific expedition on the seas and

