Test 1

c

Jennifer Cox, of Lonely Planet guidebook publishers,
identifies a growing awareness that adventure is there
for the taking: “The penny’s dropped. The sort of
say “I wish I'd had that

are realising that they can have it any

people who always
opportunity”
time they want. They just have to be brave enough

and organised enough and confident enough to do it.’

For Danny, a 30-year-old accountant, and_ his
girlfriend Tammy, a 28-year-old teacher, it’s a chance
to have a final fling before settling down. They have
bought a round-the-world ticket for a year. ‘Pm

prepared to sacrifice job security to have the trip,’ says
Danny. “here's always a niggling thought at the back
of your mind that, “OK, I'm not moving up the career
ladder, 'm going to be in the same position | was in
before when I come back,” but I think it’s a risk you
have to take. When I left the office, 1 threw my
calculator into the river as a ceremonial act of defiance!’

For Matt, who'd just got out of the Army, the
year he spent travelling amounted to a period of
metamorphosis. ‘When you're in the military, there’s
a set way of doing things, a pattern to the way you
approach problems. | went away because I really
needed to temper this, and get rid of this approach in
some cases, in order to have a reasonable existence as
a civilian.’

D

While there are as many reasons to go travelling at
my time of life as there are travellers, there do seem
to be common factors. “We have a much more
flexible workforce today, says Angela Baron of the
Institute of Personnel Development. “There are more
people working on short-term contracts and so if
your contract’s just come to an end you've got
nothing to lose.’ Larger companies are even adopting
career-break policies. “If you've spent a lot of time
and money training someone, it’s nice to know
they're coming back at some point rather than going
to work for a competitor.”

For Dan Hiscocks, director of
Travellerseye, a publishing company that specialises in
the tales of ‘ordinary’ travellers, an increasing number
of thirty-somethings are taking stock of their lives. ‘If
you're not happy doing what you're doing — and many
people aren't — it’s no longer a question of just seeing it
through. Now people are aware that opportuni
and that a job isn’t “for life” any more. Travel offers a
chance to reassess, to take a step back and think about
your life.”

managing

S exist

16

E

Is giving in to wanderlust just another example of my
generation’s inability to terms with
adulthood? Jennifer Cox thinks not. ‘It’s a sign of a

come to

better educated, more stable society when we're less
concerned with paying the bills than wanting to live
a balanced life. We're actually taking the time to ask
“Is this what I want?” ~

Ben, a 32-year-old picture researcher heading off
to Central America for a year, does not believe he’s
running away. ‘It's more a case of running towards
something. It’s trying to grab some things that | want
for myself. But he does feel some trepidation. “It’s
the thought of what Im leaving behind, that
comfortable routine — just the act of going into the
office every day, saying “hi” to everyone and sitting
down with a cup of coffee.”

I share Ben’s reservations about leaving behind an
ordered life with few challenges and ['m not sure Pd
be making this journey if I hadn't found my boss so
intolerable. As Jennifer Cox points out: “Vhis is fairly
typical. There's often a catalyst, like the break-up of a
relationship or the loss of a job. Such an event can
push people to go and do it.”

It may have taken a helpful kick up the backside
to get me moving, but I'm now approaching the next
12 months with a mounting sense of excitement.
Whatever the outcome, I'll be able to take
satisfaction in having grabbed life by the horns. And
in that I'm sure I speak for all of us ageing
backpackers.
