skill has spawned an oddly distanced attitude
to her talent. Janson often speaks in the third
person: ‘When I finished that ceiling, [
thought, “Well I didn't do it, she did’’

Of course, her trompe-l’oeil schemes can
speak for themselves. Janson’s work is ina league
of its own, far above those who have jumped on
the bandwagon (the art of trompe-l’oeil has
experienced something of a revival, but not with
entirely satisfactory results) and she has a string
of major corporate and private commissions
behind her. Much of her work is inspired by
architecture or made for architectural settings.
There is the trompe-l’veil dining room for one
client, based on the fagade of a Venetian
palazzo, and the painting at the end of a corridor
in a flat, which gives the illusion that you can
step into two further rooms.

There is always a danger with trompe-
Poeil, though, that once you get the joke, your
attention is lost, something of which Janson is
acutely aware. ‘Trompe-l’oeil has to do two
things. First, it must draw you in; it’s got to
trick you. Secondly, it has to hold you and
then engage your imagination. That is the
most important part.’

Paper 1 Reading

While trompe-l’veil has to be clever, it
must also, Janson believes, be personal to the
client. ‘I love the interaction with clients;
that is where the ideas are born,’ she says.
‘Without the rapport, the job of creating a
trompe-l’oeil scheme becomes rather difficult.
Some clients have firm ideas about what they
want; others do not. You have to be willing to
listen. You inside
imagination.’ Many have become friends, not
least because Janson practically lives with
them if she works on site.

have to. get a client's

Janson is generous in praise of her clients.
‘lam very grateful for the mad ones who have
let me loose on their walls,’ she confesses. And,
they too, seem delighted with her, which is
why she is constantly busy — despite her
inclination to play down her talent. ‘I really
don’t like to shout about myself, she repeats at
the end. ‘Like my work, I am very restrained. I
don’t want it to shout. You become bored with
things that shout.’ True, perhaps, but you could
never really become bored with Janson or her
work. It certainly deserves to become better
known, and I am prepared to incur her wrath
while I blow her trumpet.

97
