Paper 1 Reading

I may be too old for this lark, but here goes!

At 34, Tim Pozzi has left a good job to go backpacking. He ponders what has made
him — and others of his age — take the plunge.

A

This summer, I quit my job and resolved to rent out
my flat and go travelling in South East Asia for a
year. You might think I’m lucky, but I’m 34 years
old, and ['m nervous.

Ir’s not as if | haven't done the travelling thing
After
backpacking around North and South America, and

betore. university, I spent two years
when I returned, was determined to do it again some
day. But you know how it is I fell in love,
embarked on a career, bought a flat and got used to
carning a salary. But | gradually realised T had been
sacrificing my own sense of worth for my salary.
When I handed in that letter of resignation, it felt as
though I'd taken charge of my life again.

I now have no ties. Many of my friends are now
married with children and, while they wouldn't swap

places. with me, they envy me my lack of
responsibilities. I'm no longer in a relationship, and I
have no burning career ambitions. I feel almost
obliged to make the most of that freedom — if only

for my friends’ sake!

B

Why am I so nervous? In the first place, it’s a
question of making the necessary arrangements. How
could I bear to have someone else living in my home?
And how would I go about organising the letting?
And apart from anything else, | had to decide where
to go.

I'm a shocking procrastinator, and am already
several weeks behind my intended schedule. ‘Might as
well enjoy the summer in England, I told myself.
Then, “Why not hang around for the start of the
football season?’ Severing emotional ties makes it even
more difficult.

I'm putting it off because, deep down. | wonder if
I can still cope with backpacking. Will | be able to
readjust to a more basic way of life? Will | feel out of
place among a community of backpackers fresh out
of school and university?

Perhaps not. I’ve discovered it’s increasingly
common for Britons in their late ewenties and thirties
to want to disentangle themselves from the lives
they've made for themselves and head off for foreign

climes.
